# Physical Exposure Model
## Context
Canada is similar in geographic area to China or the United States (9,984,670 km²) but ranks 38th in terms of global population (35.1 million in 2016), with the majority of people and assets (~76%) concentrated in urban centres and sparsely settled areas situated along its southern border (Statistics Canada, 2016b).  Like many areas in the world, Canada has experienced rapid growth and development with built up-areas in urban settings nearly doubling over a 40-year period from 5,300 km² in 1975 to more than 10,880 km² in 2016 (Pesaresi et al., 2018).  Nearly half of all Canadians (15.5 million people) currently live in and around the metropolitan centres of Toronto, Windsor, Montreal, Vancouver, Calgary, Edmonton, Ottawa and Winnipeg.

The number of buildings constructed in areas exposed to damaging earthquake hazards has more than doubled over the same time period from 2 million in 1975 to nearly 4.5 million in 2016. Financial investments in residential and commercial buildings that are situated in these hazard-prone areas total more than CAD $4 trillion, nearly half the total capital stock value of Canada. The susceptibility of people and assets to earthquake hazards in these areas is concentrated primarily in older neighbourhoods in which buildings and related infrastructure either predate or do not meet current seismic safety guidelines (NBCC, 2015). These concentrated pockets of older and poorly constructed buildings also house some of the most vulnerable populations in Canada. Areas of concern in Central, Eastern and Maritime regions of Canada include urban and rural settlements along reactivated zones of crustal weakness in the St. Lawrence Valley, the northern Appalachians and the Atlantic coastal margin.  Areas of concern in western Canada include densely settled urban centers and rural-remote coastal communities in the Cascadia region of southwest British Columbia, the Queen Charlotte region of central British Columbia and the Yakutat region of northern British Columbia and the Yukon.

### Building Inventory
The building stock of Canada is classified using a combination of 36 structural types and 33 occupancy classes that are defined as part of the standard HAZUS methodology (FEMA, 2011).  Context-specific mapping schemes for each combination of land use, structural type and occupancy class are used to allocate a distribution of building classes that reflect the overall structural form and function of a given neighbourhood. Eight structural types represent more than 95% of the aggregate building inventory in western Canada and the Maritime provinces of eastern Canada.  As expected, the majority of these are single and multi-family residential wood frame buildings (1-3 stories), and mixtures of low and mid-rise unreinforced masonry and concrete structures that accommodate both residential and business functions.  The relative proportions of these buildings vary as a function of land use and the mix of occupancy classes at the neighbourhood level.

The distribution of building types is more varied in central portions of Canada.  Although single and multi-family wood frame structures make up more than 90% of the total inventory, there are significantly higher proportions of low and mid-rise unreinforced masonry buildings (9.3%) with lesser amounts of reinforced masonry and low-rise steel frame structures. Building classes in the far north (Nunavut) are dominated by multi-purpose wood frame and manufactured panel wall structures (96%) with lower proportions of brick masonry and steel frame buildings used for commercial and industrial purposes. Differences in the mix of building classes reflect construction practices that have been adapted to accommodate both extreme weather conditions, and the higher costs of construction materials that are shipped from manufacturing centres in southern Canada.

### Population Dynamics

Unlike other disaster types, the impacts of an earthquake event are experienced over a period of minutes, and can be repeated in aftershock sequences that can last several weeks or months.  Understanding the population dynamics of a community and the fractions of people likely to be in buildings of different types over a 24-hour period is essential for estimating injuries and fatalities at the time of an earthquake. We use a Canadian adaptation of the HAZUS and PAGER methodologies (FEMA, 2011; Jaiswal & Wald, 2014) to estimate average building populations at different times of the day based on the number, square footage and mix of functional building types for a given area. Neighbourhood-level populations are estimated for standard workday hours when people are at an office, school or other group facility (9am-5pm); for morning and evening commute hours when people are in transit (7am-9am; 5pm-7pm), and; for evening hours when the majority of people are at home (7pm-7am). 

### Capital Asset Valuation

Capital asset values reflect the estimated cost to repair or replace residential and business property that may be damaged as a result of an earthquake. Estimates are based on unit construction costs ($CAD/ft2) that are derived for 33 representative structural classes using building valuation data compiled from available public sources (Moselle, 2017; Turner & Townsend, 2020).  The resulting assessment of total capital wealth for Canada is ~8 trillion CAD$, consistent with 2014 global values reported in the Penn World Table (Arcadis, 2015; Feenstra et al., 2015).  These values have been adjusted with an annual growth rate of 3.1% to reflect estimated capital stock assets at the time of the 2016 census.  Capital asset valuation for each Province and Territory (see Table 1) reflects regional variations in construction costs as reported by the Canadian Consumer Price Index (Chiru et al., 2015).

Although Canada ranks 15th in the global valuation of capital wealth for developed countries (Arcadis, 2015), it has a very high potential for loss with nearly half of all capital assets (4.3 trillion CAD$) exposed to severe earthquake hazards.  Half of the exposed capital wealth is distributed across low-density residential neighbourhoods in urban and exurban settings where the number of single and multi-family homes exceeds that of all other urban land use types by a factor of 5 to 1. However, it is the concentrations of high value building assets in high-density mixed urban residential neighbourhoods and commercial-industrial precincts that pose the greatest threat in terms of both direct economic loss potential, and the cascading effects of lost revenue caused by business disruptions in the months and years following a catastrophic earthquake. This is of particular concern in major commercial hubs of Metro Vancouver, Victoria, Montreal and Quebec City; and in the surrounding urban centres of southern Vancouver Island and the Saint Lawrence Valley that support interconnected networks of both regional commerce and international trade.

More than 90% of Canada’s building stock assets are concentrated in three primary structural types.  These include single-family and larger commercial wood frame buildings (48%; 3.9 trillion CAD$); low and mid-rise unreinforced masonry buildings (30%; 2.5 trillion CAD$), and; mixed purpose concrete shear wall structures (15%; 1.3 trillion CAD$) that are common in medium and high-density residential neighbourhoods and in mixed residential and commercial high-rise business centres across Canada. Of concern are concentrations of older wood, unreinforced masonry and non-ductile concrete frame structures in areas of high seismic hazard that predate modern building performance design guidelines that were introduced into the National Building Code beginning in 1975.

## Data Schema
The following parameters are currenty being used to describe each asset in the exposure model:

* **Asset reference**: A unique ke y used to identify the asset instance ;
* **Location**: Geographic coordinates of the asset expressed in decimal deg ees ;
* **Taxonomy** : Reference to the classiﬁcation scheme that describes the asset ;
* **Number**: A numerical value describing the number of units at the given location ( e. g .building count ).
* **Structural cost**: This parameter represents the structural replacement cost of the asset. This value can be deﬁned in three possible ways: the aggregated structural cost ( i.e. the total economic value of all the units with a certain taxonomy at a given location ); the cost per unit ( i.e. the average value for a single building) ; the cost per unit of area.
* **Non-structural cost**: This parameter is used to deﬁne the cost of the non-structural components. This cost deﬁned in the same way as the structural cost.
* **Contents cost**: This parameter is used to deﬁne the contents cost, and it can be deﬁned in the same way as the structural cost.
• **Retroﬁtting cost:** This parameter is used to deﬁne the economic structural cost due to the implementation of a retroﬁtting/ streng thening intervention. The retroﬁttin g cost can be deﬁned in the same way as the structural cost.
* **Occupants**: This parameter deﬁnes the number of peo ple that might exist inside of a given structure. Diﬀerent values of occupants can be stored according to the time of the da y ( e.g day, night,transit ).
* **Deductible**: This parameter is used in the computation of the insured losses, and it establishes the economic value that needs to be deducted from the ground-up losses. A deductible needs to be deﬁned for each cost type ( structural, non-structural and contents) . This threshold can be deﬁned in two wa y s: 1 ) the direct (absolute) value that will be deducted ; 2 ) the fraction (relative) of the total cost that will be deducted.
* **Limit**: This p arameter establishes the maximum economic amount that can be insured, and it also needs to be deﬁned for each cost t yp e. The limit can also be deﬁned as an absolute or relative q uantit y .
